Add developer guideline for validation (#12811)
gardener/gardener: docs/extensions/validation-guidelines-for-extensions.md

# Validation Guidelines For Extensions

This document provides general developer guidelines on validation practices and conventions used in the Gardener extensions codebase.

## Validation of Provider Configuration

With the implementation of [GEP-01](../proposals/01-extensibility.md) the cloud provider, operating system and networking specific knowledge is extracted to external extension controllers.
Gardener itself is provider-agnostic.
The API resources contain provider configurations.
The Gardener API Server does not understand these provider configurations and cannot validate them.
They should be validated by extension admission components.

Provider configuration fields are of type `*runtime.RawExtension`.
Extension admission components should decode the provider configuration and perform validation of it.

> ## Validation of Referenced Resources

Reviewer: Extensions usually have two components, admission and service controller, the former takes care to admit resources in the Garden cluster and the latter in the seed. This document seems to be focusing on the admission component, I think it should be made more inclusive so that it targets also the service component or an additional section should be added to cover it.

Author: Hm, do you mean the resources extension controller creates in the Seed? If that's the case, this was discussed in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12500. Right now, I am not aware of extensions validating provider config for extension resources in the Seed. It would make sense to add such a requirement/recommendation to the guide if/once we implement it across the extensions.

Reviewer: No, I mean for example webhooks registered [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/blob/ff724a801cad2965d7bff769ff0fb64b415968c7/pkg/cmd/options.go#L69-L80).

Author: Aren't these the webhooks registered to the Seed? 😅 
They are not validating webhooks, right?

Reviewer: You are right, the document is focusing on the Garden cluster, sorry for the confusion.

Author: No, it was actually a good point. We will most probably add validation at some point for the provider configs in the Seed. However, atm we don't have this.

The provider configuration may contain references to another resources.
Currently, only `Secret`s and `ConfigMap`s are allowed to be referenced.
For more details, see [Referenced Resources](../extensions/referenced-resources.md).

The referenced resources should be validated by the extension admission components.
Usually, the validation consists of checking if the required data keys are present and if the values are in the expected format.
However, it is challenging to validate `UPDATE` operations on referenced resources.
Extension admission components have the following implementation options to cover validation for `UPDATE`:
- Check if a `Secret` or `ConfigMap` is in-use as a referenced resource by a Shoot from the corresponding extension type. This usually increases the memory usage of the component due to client caches for `Secret`s/`ConfigMap`s.

> - Enforce the referenced resource to be immutable. In this way, the referenced resource cannot be updated. Hence, there is no need to validate update. However, this approach has worst end-user experience. Every-time end-users have to update the referenced resource, they have to create a new one and update the reference in the corresponding Shoots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enforce the referenced resource to be immutable. In this way, the referenced resource cannot be updated. Hence, there is no need to validate update. However, this approach leads to poor end-user experience. Every time end-users have to update the referenced resource, they have to create a new one and update the reference in the corresponding Shoots.
```
